Post: Empower your documentation with addons (#278)
readthedocs/website: content/posts/enable-beta-addons.md

tags: addons, hosting
authors: Manuel Kaufmann
status: published
image: /images/enable-beta-addons.jpg
image_credit: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@impatrickt?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Patrick Tomasso</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/open-book-lot-Oaqk7qqNh_c?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>

In the last year, we have been focusing ourselves on providing a better experience for authors and readers of the documentation.
Today, we are thrilled to introduce our latest feature,
designed around user feedback to build a better user experience: **Read the Docs Addons**.

Read the Docs Addons helps authors to keep their documentation updated by focusing on the most relevant pages,
while simplifying the review process --and also helps readers to navigate the documentation in a simple way,
always knowing the versions they are reading avoiding confusions.

Continue reading to explore the full list of addons and how to enable them in your project.

## How to enable addons in your project

To enable Read the Docs Addons in your project follow these steps:

> 1. Go to the [new beta dashboard](https://beta.readthedocs.org).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Go to the new beta dashboard: [Community](https://beta.readthedocs.org) | [Business](https://beta.readthedocs.com)
```

### DocDiff

![Docdiff Addons](/images/addons-docdiff.gif)

DocDiff shows changes made on the rendered versions by **visually highlighting the differences between
the current pull request and the latest version of the project's documentation**.
This addons allows reviewers to quickly find what has changed on this pull request
but also find style/rendering issues before accepting and merging the pull request.

### Pull request notification

![Pull request notification](/images/addons-pull-request-notification.png)

This notification warns users letting them know the documentation page they are reading
comes from a pull request to clearly distinguish this version from the official one.

### Flyout

![Flyout Addons](/images/addons-flyout.png)

The _flyout_ is the small floating Read the Docs section where all the documentation versions and translations are listed.
This allows readers to **find the exact version they are looking for** and also read the documention in their own language if it's available.
Besides, it contains useful links to go to the project's home, builds page and offline formats such as PDFs and ebooks.

> ### Non-stable notification

Reviewer: I feel like we're highlighting notifications in 3 sections... shouldn't we just combine them together and note that it supports each type as a bullet or similar? Seems like a lot of notifications.

Author: I don't have a strong opinion here. I think it's fine for now, and I like that we are showing them all in the screenshots with different doctools on each. We can find a different/better pattern for our own documentation if we want.

> title: Empower your documentation with addons
> date: 2024-03-27

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Empower your documentation with addons
date: 2024-04-18
description: Read the Docs Addons let documentation authors add features to their documentation such as analytics, version feedback, and search as you type to documentation in a modular way where authors have control.
```

I verified that this description will automatically get picked up in both the meta description and OpenGraph. This is what will show in previews when the link to the blog is shared in Slack/Discord/FB for example. https://github.com/readthedocs/website/issues/271

Reviewer 2: I'm assuming here that we are capitalizing addons when writing "Read the Docs Addons" but keeping it lowercase when it just referring to addons generally.

In the last year, we have been focusing ourselves on providing a better experience for authors and readers of the documentation.
Today, we are thrilled to introduce our latest feature,
designed on top of users' feedback to build a better experience for them in our platform: **Read the Docs Addons**.

Read the Docs Addons helps authors to keep their documentation updated by focusing on the most relevant pages,
while simplifying the review process --and also helps readers to navigate the documentation in a simple way,
always knowing the versions they are reading avoiding confusions.

Continue reading to explore the full list of addons and how to enable them in your project.

## Full list of addons

<!--
TODO describe each of the addons into its own section,
similar to what we have in https://github.com/readthedocs/addons/blob/main/README.md

Consider also https://about.readthedocs.com/docs-as-code/
-->

### Analytics

![Analytics Addons](/images/addons-analytics.png)

> Analytics allows you to explore your documentation traffic to understand what are the pages your readers read the most.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Analytics allows authors to explore your documentation traffic to understand what are the pages readers read the most.
```

I generally like referring to "you" in blogs but it's a little unclear here and at some other points in the blog. We are referring to you as a documentation author/manager here while above we refer to "authors". We should be consistent. If we think non-authors will read the blog, maybe just use "authors" and "readers".

With this data, your team is able to **prioritize the work on pages with high traffic** over others with less.
Besides, you can find out what are the terms your users search the most and
write documentation pages that include those terms so they can easily find them.

### DocDiff

![Docdiff Addons](/images/addons-docdiff.gif)

> DocDiff shows changes made on the rendered versions by **visually highlighing the differences between

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DocDiff shows changes made on the rendered versions by **visually highlighting the differences between
```

the current pull request and the latest version of the project's documentation**.
This addons allows reviewers to quickly find what has changed on this pull request
but also find style/rendering issues before accepting and merging the pull request.

### Pull request notification

![Pull request notification](/images/addons-pull-request-notification.png)

This notification warns users letting them know the documentation page they are reading
comes from a pull request to clearly distinguish this version from the official one.

### Flyout

![Flyout Addons](/images/addons-flyout.png)

> We call _flyout_ to the small floating Read the Docs section where all the documentation versions and translations are listed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The _flyout_ is the small floating Read the Docs section where all the documentation versions and translations are listed.
```

> This allows readers to **find the exact version they are looking for** and also read the documention on their own language if it's available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows readers to **find the exact version they are looking for** and also read the documention in their own language if it's available.
```

> Besides, it contains useful links to go to the project's home, builds page and offline formats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besides, it contains useful links to go to the project's home, builds page and offline formats such as PDFs and ebooks.
```

### Non-stable notification

![Non-stable notification](/images/addons-non-stable-notification.png)

> A notification on all _non-stable_ version is shown to clearly communicate readers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A notification on all _non-stable_ versions is shown to clearly communicate to readers
```

they may be reading an outdated version of the documentation.

> This helps readers to avoid confusions and quickly jump into the _latest_ version of the documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This helps readers to avoid confusion and quickly jump into the _latest_ version of the documentation.
```

Also, did you mean "stable" here?

Author: ```suggestion
This helps readers to avoid confusion and quickly jump into the _stable_ version of the documentation.
```

Author: He, yeah. Technically, the correct would be "latest stable version", but that adds more confusion I guess 😅 . Saying _stable_ is accurate as well.

Besides, it **reduces support requests from old version of your product**.

### Latest version notification

![Latest notification](/images/addons-latest-notification.png)

> A notification shown on _latest_ version to tell readers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A notification shown on the _latest_ version tells readers
```

they are reading the _latest/development_ version of the documentation that may include features not yet deployed.

> This will help your readers to avoid confusions on the version they are using and the one they are reading,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will help your readers to avoid confusion on the version they are using and the one they are reading,
```

> while letting your project to expose these yet unrelease features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
while letting your project to expose these yet unreleased features.
```

### Search as you type

![Search](/images/addons-search.gif)

> Search _as-you-type_ powered by an Elastic backend that allows users to quickly find exactly what they are looking for while typing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Search _as-you-type_ is powered by an Elastic backend that allows users to quickly find exactly what they are looking for while typing.
```

Maybe "elasticsearch"?

Author: ```suggestion
Search _as-you-type_ is powered by an Elasticsearch backend that allows users to quickly find exactly what they are looking for while typing.
```

> It also **saves recent searches to have them at the tip of your fingers**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also **saves recent searches to have them at the tip of your fingers**.
```

Is your the docs author or the reader?

Author: Hrm, in this case is the reader --which is the one _using_ this feature.

### Sponsorship

<!--

TODO: not sure if it's worth to explain this here or not.
Maybe we can have a paragraph similar to the first one in
https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/advertising/ethical-advertising.html
and link to that page.

-->

![EthicalAds](/images/addons-ethical-ads.png)

> EthicalAds is the business model that makes Read the Docs to continue being a free web service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EthicalAds is the business model that allows Read the Docs to continue being a free web service.
```

It respects users while providing value to advertisers.
We don’t track you, sell your data, or anything else.

> We simply show ads to users, based on the content of the pages you look at.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We simply show ads to users, based on the content of the page you're currently looking at.
```

## How to enable addons in your project

To enable Read the Docs Addons in your project follow these steps:

1. Go to the [new beta dashboard](https://beta.readthedocs.org).
1. Click on the project you want to enable addons.
1. Go to **Settings**, then **Addons (Beta)** from the left bar.
1. Check **Enable Addons**.

Now you have Read the Docs Addons enabled,

> user of your documentation can start using these features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
readers of your documentation can start using these features.
```

## Moving forward

We have implemented Read the Docs Addons in a modular way that allows us to expand them in the future.
There are plans to keep adding more addons to this list and also re-implement some of the Sphinx extension we've created in the past
(e.g. [`sphinx-hoverxref`](https://github.com/readthedocs/sphinx-hoverxref)) as an addon,
making it compatible with non-Sphinx projects.

> We are also open to suggestions for new addons, let's us know if you have an idea!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are also open to suggestions for new addons, let us know if you have an idea!
```

There's a typo here but this should guide folks based on how you want the feedback. You do this below, but I'd do it here too. If you want Issues in GitHub, link "let us know" to that. If you want an email, link to the contact form.

## Conclusion

> Read the Docs provides a lot of feature for documentation authors to simplify their workflow to keep the documentation updated,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Read the Docs provides a lot of features for documentation authors to simplify their workflow and to keep the documentation updated,
```

> providing pull request previews, automatition rules, versioning, translation, and many other features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
providing pull request previews, automation rules, versioning, translation, and many other features.
```

> The introduction of Read the Docs Addons, empowers the readers experience as well, closing the circle between authors and readers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The introduction of Read the Docs Addons, empowers the readers' experience as well, closing the circle between authors and readers.
```

title: Empower your documentation with addons

> date: 2024-04-18

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2024-04-24
```

> description: Read the Docs Addons let documentation authors add features to their documentation such as analytics, version feedback, and search as you type to documentation in a modular way where authors have control.

Reviewer: What is `version feedback`?

Author: I'm not 100% sure. David wrote this description; but it could be either:

1. pull request, non-stable and latest notifications shown on top of the page
2. doc diff

We can make it more specific if we want like "version notifications" or "version differences"

> category: Changelog

Reviewer: I feel like this isn't a changelog entry. It's marketing or a feature announcement, I'd say.

Author: ```suggestion
category: Feature announcement
```

tags: addons, hosting
authors: Manuel Kaufmann
status: published
image: /images/enable-beta-addons.jpg
image_credit: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@impatrickt?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Patrick Tomasso</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/open-book-lot-Oaqk7qqNh_c?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>

In the last year, we have been focusing ourselves on providing a better experience for authors and readers of the documentation.
Today, we are thrilled to introduce our latest feature,

> designed on top of users' feedback to build a better experience for them in our platform: **Read the Docs Addons**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
designed around user feedback to build a better user experience: **Read the Docs Addons**.
```

Read the Docs Addons helps authors to keep their documentation updated by focusing on the most relevant pages,
while simplifying the review process --and also helps readers to navigate the documentation in a simple way,

> always knowing the versions they are reading avoiding confusions.

Reviewer: This feels like a pretty broad claim, and I don't really understand how addons helps here. Is this referring to analytics & the version warning? We should explain how we're providing these benefits.

Author: This paragraph refers to _all the addons_ as a whole actually 😄 

- "focusing on the most relevant pages" -> analytics
- "simplifying the review process" -> docdiff
- "navigate the documentation in a simple way" -> flyout
- "knowing the versions they are reading" -> notifications

Each of these concepts are explained on each of the following sections.
